[RUMBLING]
[HUMMING]
>> I was conscious
in my mother's womb,
feeling the movements
in her body,
aware of my own helpless state.
[HEARTBEAT]
[RUMBLING]
This body, bundle of bones,
is not I. Occasionally,
the darkness of the womb
would be disappeared,
and light would visit me.
On one side, I wanted to
express myself as a human being.
Yet, on the other
side, I didn't,
because I felt I was spirit.
[RUMBLING]
[CHATTER]
I see behind the scenes.
The visible man is a shadow.
As soon as I change
my consciousness,
I see everything just as if
it were a motion picture.
>> I distinctly remember the
excitement of meeting Swami
Yogananda.
He was straight from the heart.
He looked strange, like
a woman with long hair.
But I remember
his powerful eyes.
He created such a stir.
>> I remember the first time
I heard Yogananda's voice.
I got a record, I think,
from SRF, and I put it on.
I didn't know what
to expect, you know?
And then this booming, powerful
(LOUDLY) I, Paramahansa
Yogananda, am singing.
Sing with me.
I went, aaaagh.
>> I, Paramahansa
Yogananda, am praying.
Pray with me.
Bless me, that with
the awakening dawn
I may awaken all souls with
my own and bring them to thee.
[MUSIC - PARAMAHANSA YOGANANDA]
He wasn't trying
to sing prettily.
He wasn't trying to
entertain people.
He was singing,
you know, to God.
It was so powerful.
>> While I was in India,
I was with Ravi Shankar.
He gave me "Autobiography
of a Yogi."
I just looked at the
cover, and he just
zapped me with his eyes.
I mean, I can't imagine-- if
I hadn't read that, I probably
wouldn't have a life, really.
I probably would have
kicked the bucket,
or I'd just be, you know,
some horrible person,
have a pointless life.
It just gave meaning to life.
>> Steve Jobs apparently had
only one book on his iPad.
Lo and behold,
that book turns out
to be "The Autobiography
of a Yogi."
>> Yoga, for many, has become
something that you do with
your body.
But the yogis never taught that.
The way that Yogananda
taught yoga was use the body.
You have a body.
But it's really about the mind,
expanding your consciousness.
>> Who am I?
Who you are?
Why we came to this
Earth as a human?
>> It's really very easy to get
lost in the complexity of life.
>> We are conflicted
beings as humans.
One of the deepest
things about us
is that our lives don't make
sense except in the mystery.
>> Yogananda provided us
a vocabulary to talk about
the human spirit that got
away from dogma, and doctrine,
and ritual.
And whether it be a Hindu,
Muslim, Christian, Jewish--
whatever tradition
you're part of--
Yogananda charted a path
inward that connected you
with your own divinity.
>> Buried during the Dark
Ages, Kriya Yoga was revived
for modern man by the deathless
yogi Mahavatar Babaji.
Babaji instructed
Lahiri Mahasaya
to teach Kriya Yoga to
others, the transmission
of the ancient science
from guru to disciple.
Unknown to society in general,
a great spiritual Renaissance
started in a remote
corner of Banaras.
[CHATTER]
[CHIMES]
As the fragrance of flowers
cannot be suppressed,
so devotees from every part of
India began to seek the divine
nectar of this liberated master.
Day after day, the guru
initiated one or two devotees
into Kriya Yoga, the
science of meditation.
Early in their married life,
my parents became disciples.
Lahiri Mahasaya predicted
my birth and that
through this body
many shall receive
the spiritual
enlightenment of India.
The message of yoga will
encircle the globe, he said.
It will aid in establishing
the brotherhood of man.
But when I heard the word
guru, it frightened me.
For I knew what that
responsibility meant.
>> His great burden is to be
the representative of this
5,000-year-old tradition.
>> This is a man with
intuitive knowledge,
extraordinary yogic powers, and
he could perceive events that
were decades in front of him.
But his teachings
caused controversy.
>> He would be
called into question,
and everything he worked
for would unravel.
[WHISPERING VOICES]
[LOCOMOTIVE]
>> Every soul is on a journey.
People are at different
levels in that journey.
I think we all believe that
there's more to life than what
we experience every day.
>> Yogananda happens to be
what I would call a spiritual
prodigy, a spiritual genius,
which means he had access
to a domain of awareness that
most people don't have access
to.
Like mathematical
geniuses, he explored
a much larger territory
in the spiritual domain.
>> Sometimes, I used to
lapse into the consciousness
of my true spirit.
Clear recollections came
to me of a distant life
in which I had been a yogi
amid the Himalayan snows.
>> He also had visions
of seeing his guru.
Throughout the ages,
there have been
mystics who come with
special knowledge, that
helps us understand our
place in the Universe.
Yogananda was born at the
dawn of the Atomic Age, when
modern physics would
shatter our most
basic beliefs about
the nature of reality,
and paved the way for an
ancient and hidden teaching
to be received by many.
>> Yogananda had been told since
infancy by saints and seers
that he'd be taking these
teachings to the West.
But he thought, how
is this possible?
You know, it was absurd, because
he barely spoke any English.
>> One day, my mind
went away from Ranchi.
I went to the
storeroom to meditate,
and I fell into an ecstasy.
[RUMBLING]
America.
Surely, these people
are Americans.
>> It's scary to the mind.
I think the first thing
was, [EXHALES] oh my god.
>> Imagine in your own life
having a message so strong that
it totally changes
your life in a moment.
And at that time, he'd been
here about three years.
He probably thought
this was his life work.
>> I had founded a school,
following the educational
ideals of the rishis, whose
forest ashrams had been
the ancient seat of learning.
Overcoming restlessness
of the body and mind
by concentration techniques,
achieved astonishing results.
>> He established a
"How to Live" school.
I wish we had "How
to Live" schools.
You have to learn your grammar.
You have to learn your
math and your science.
But you also have to
learn how to live.
>> --and 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] 1, 2, 3,
4, 5 [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Ma'am, love conquers all.
>> Love conquers all.
Very good.
>> He's in love
with his country.
He is being respected
by his community.
He's seeing his vision manifest
where children are learning
the art and science of yoga.
And then he's sitting
there, and all of a sudden
he becomes aware that he
has to leave all of it.
>> God is taking
me away to America.
>> He never wanted
to come to America.
That was not part
of his dream at all.
Let me just go to the Himalayas
and just live in a cave there.
I can do good there.
I can pray for people.
But his teacher said no,
you must go to the West.
Go to America.
>> Tears stood in my eyes as I
cast a last look at the little
boys and the sunny
acres of Ranchi.
I knew henceforth I would
dwell in foreign lands.
[GUNSHOTS]
[MUSIC - SPIKE JONES
AND HIS CITY SLICKERS,
"THE CHARLESTON"]
(SINGING) Charleston,
Charleston, made in Carolina.
Some dance, some prance.
I'll say there's
nothing finer than--
[CLARINET SOLO]
>> How alone I was here.
Not a soul I knew.
I had heard many stories
about the materialistic West,
a land very
different from India.
It was somewhat of a
daunting experience
to go out on the streets.
My strange dress prompted
boyish mockery and--
and catcalls.
>> Who's that?
>> There were kids that
were throwing stones at him,
calling him names.
>> I think he was called
a magician at one point,
a snake charmer.
>> In 1920, many Americans were
still not used to having Jews
here.
And now comes a
darker-skinned swami
in orange robes and a turban.
>> I noticed some hot dog signs.
In imagination, I saw all kinds
of dogs going through the meat
chopper, and I
thought, my Lord, why
did you bring me to the
land where people eat dogs?
>> When Yogananda
came to United States,
it was after World War I. The
world was a very different
place.
It was a very powerful time.
>> There was this
upsurge of freedom--
freedom of sexuality,
freedom of expression.
Boundaries of known reality were
being shattered and penetrated.
You had the Einsteinian
revolution sort
of flowering into
quantum physics,
and it became clear
that the world
was not what it appeared to be.
>> Western philosophers are
talking about the death of God
and Yogananda says, it's
not about the death of God.
It's about the
reconceptualization
of the Divine.
>> It's significant that
Yogananda's first lecture
in America was called
the Science of Religion--
not Hinduism, because using
religious terminology,
in Western people's minds, would
place his offerings in a box.
But Self-Realization?
Oh.
Yoga?
Those are universal.
>> The spine and the brain
are the altars of God.
That's where the
electricity of God
flows down into the nervous
system, into the world,
and the searchlights of your
senses are turned outwards.
But when you will reverse the
searchlights, through Kriya
Yoga, and be concentrated
in the spine,
you will behold the Maker.
That's what
Self-Realization teaches--
the technique of meditation,
recharging the body battery
with cosmic energy.
For it is not a creed
or dogma, but a science
of the soul and spirit.
How the soul descended from
the cosmic consciousness
into the earth, and
the body and the senses
is the purpose of this work.
>> Imagine hearing that
God is in your spine.
In 1920, it was radical.
It was a bold explanation of
where to go to experience God.
>> For me, God is still
a bit unfathomable.
>> She-- she's in everything.
She's in everyone.
>> If you call him
energy, that's fine.
>> Yogananda thought of
Self-Realization as a science.
He thought of Kriya
Yoga as a science.
Religion has a lot of
baggage, but a science
means that it's part of
a scientific process.
It's empirical.
You can test certain things.
And your own spiritual
practice and Self-Realization
is that scientific process.
>> An individual is sort
of an organized packet
of consciousness that is
part of a bigger ocean
of consciousness, in that when
you are meditating and going
deep within, such as in yoga,
your inner consciousness is
combining with that
higher consciousness.
>> You couldn't have described
to a Westerner what Yogananda
was teaching prior
to the 20th century.
There simply wasn't
a vocabulary for it.
The apparently solid body
is made up of these whirling
atoms, and protons,
and electrons,
and those are
composed of energy--
the basic substance of creation.
>> The body is potentially
vast and omnipresent.
This earth is nothing
but movies to me.
Just like the beam
of a motion picture,
so is everything made
of shadows and light.
That's what we are-- light
and shadows of the Lord,
nothing else than that.
There's one purpose--
to get to the beam.
>> But the doors of perception
don't often open with
the intellect.
Something very powerful has
to happen to shake us out
of our comfort zone.
>> It was in Bareilly
on a midnight.
As I slept beside father, I was
awakened by a peculiar flutter.
>> When he was
about 11 years old,
he and his father were
in northern India.
The family was
temporarily separated,
and his mother had
gone to Calcutta
to prepare for the wedding
of the eldest brother.
And unknown to them, she had
contracted Asiatic cholera.
>> He had a dream that night
that his mother came to him.
>> The flimsy curtains parted,
and I saw the beloved form
of my mother.
(WHISPERING) Rush to
Calcutta if you would see me.
The wraith-like figure vanished.
Mother is dying.
I collapsed into an
almost lifeless state.
>> A telegram arrived.
She had died in a
matter of hours.
>> What was the purpose of this?
Her solacing black eyes had
been my refuge in the trifling
tragedies of childhood.
>> Farewell, my child.
The cosmic mother
will protect you.
>> (ECHOING) It is I who
have watched over thee,
life after life, in the
tenderness of many mothers.
See in my gaze the two black
eyes, the lost, beautiful eyes
thou seekest.
>> I used to dream
in my childhood,
a tiger used to break
my leg at night.
Mother used to come running
with a candle and say,
you are dreaming!
Where is it broken?
And then I used to laugh.
From that time on, I was
watchful, even in dreams,
to separate the
unreal from the real.
>> Once he had
cracked open the door,
his world would
never be the same.
But it would take
time and many tests
before he would fully awaken
into this new reality.
>> Merciful mother
of the universe,
teach me thyself
through visions,
or through a guru sent by thee.
I hoped to find him at
the Himalayan snows,
the Master whose face often
appeared to me in visions.
I gazed searchingly about me
on any excursion from home
for the face of
my destined guru.
One day, I wiped my
tear-swollen face
and set out for the distant
marketplace in Banaras.
Something told me
to look behind.
I had seen him in dreams.
The face was the one I'd
seen in 1,000 visions,
holding a promise that I
had not fully understood.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I came to know him long
before I met him in this life.
It was him.
It was my Master.
He said, I have been waiting.
>> A true guru is there
to lead you to yourself,
not to himself, to what we
are truly capable of, not just
the limited aspect of us.
>> The spiritual path
is farthest from easy.
It requires undoing
aspects of ourselves.
>> My guru could not be
bribed, even by love.
The hard core of egotism
is difficult to dislodge,
except rudely.
This flattening to the ego
treatment was hard to endure.
I sometimes felt that
metaphorically he
was discovering and uprooting
every diseased tooth in my jaw.
Many teachers will tell you
to believe and then put out
your eyes of reason.
My guru said, I want you to
keep your eyes of reason open.
In addition, I will open
in you the eye of wisdom.
[SITAR MUSIC]
>> Yoga for me is freedom.
>> The state of needing
nothing is yoga.
>> We become one with peace.
We become one with joy.
We become one with love.
And we realize that
that is our true nature.
>> How tirelessly
my Master labored,
that the boy Mukunda be
transformed into the monk
Yogananda.
[STREETCAR BELLS]
Three happy years were spent in
humble circumstances in Boston.
I gave public lectures,
taught classes, and addressed
clubs, colleges, churches, and
groups of every denomination.
>> But it took Yogananda a
few years to realize that he
wasn't in the right place for
this message to really take
off.
[MUSIC - "HOORAY FOR HOLLYWOOD"]
[CAR HORNS]
>> In 1925, Yogananda
arrives in Los Angeles.
And on the first night,
according to the "L.A. Times,"
over 6,000 people
attend his talk.
That's double the capacity
of the auditorium.
Los Angeles is
this new frontier.
It's a place of possibility
of a new beginning.
Ideas of Asian
spirituality have permeated
the West Coast in a way that
they haven't on the East Coast.
>> People come to Los Angeles
often looking for something.
So there's this already
mind of a seeker.
>> Yogananda does a seven-night
speaker series at the L.A.
Philharmonic Auditorium.
>> People go just to see the
show and because he's exotic
and entertaining
and a great speaker.
And then others really
stick around and end up
finding that he has
really powerful teachings,
and he's a very good
vehicle for the message.
>> He knew the
power of initiative.
He didn't wait for anybody
to get this wisdom out.
He sent out lessons via mail.
Mail order at the time
was completely brand new.
It was like sending
out an e-blast today.
>> What Yogananda did that was
profound for Americans was talk
about how you can have a
personal relationship with
the Divine.
>> I was a totally
frustrated man.
I had thought money
could give me happiness,
but nothing seemed
to satisfy me.
I was skeptical,
like everyone was.
>> Sit straight,
shoulder blades together,
chin parallel to the ground.
Concentrate on the point
between the eyebrows--
center of thought and
will and concentration.
And again and again,
say, "Reveal Thyself"
as joy and wisdom and
spiritual perception.
Again and again say,
"Reveal Thyself."
>> James Lynn was a
wealthy industrialist,
and he went on to become a very
close devotee and an important
benefactor of Yogananda's
work around the country.
>> Many who joined his classes
stepped forward and wrote
checks, trying to
keep Yogananda in L.A.
>> And he saw such enthusiasm.
He thought, this is the
place to establish a center.
>> When I saw the large
building on the crest of Mount
Washington, I
recognized it at once.
>> As he saw, this is the place.
>> This became the
headquarters of his work.
Yogananda called it the
"spiritual White House,"
and it was a place
where he gave classes.
He even had rooms available to
rent with the idea of starting
a spiritual community.
And the first event
he held there,
before the property
was even purchased,
was an Easter Sunrise service.
>> True Christianity has
been lost and forgotten.
And what the Ancients
taught in India
has been lost and forgotten.
Those ought to be revived as
one highway to the infinite.
>> One of the keys to
Yogananda's popularity
in America was his love
and affection for Jesus.
He placed Jesus on the
altar with his lineage
and with Krishna.
>> He said that Jesus really was
representing to us this is who
you are.
This is your ability
to open yourself
to the Divine Mystery
in ways that you never
thought were possible.
>> Jesus is revered in India.
People don't realize that.
But he is held to be either
an incarnation of God
or, at the very
least, a supreme yogi.
>> The value of Yogananda's
teaching was that he picked up
on this angle, that there is
this universal opportunity
to understand who we are.
What is true of Jesus is
also true of all of us.
>> It's not about
religion at all.
It's about what's
behind religion--
meditation.
Meditate.
That's what he said.
Meditation is the catchword.
>> Yoga really is a
philosophical system.
A lot of people go
to yoga to look hot.
It's not set up to
give you flat abs,
even though that's
a nice byproduct.
It's really set up
to understand God.
>> Kriya Yoga is the science
of God-Realization through
meditation.
>> Yogananda did teach Hatha
Yoga as one way to prepare
for meditation.
>> He also developed this system
of energization exercises.
>> The tension exercises--
charge the body with the life
current from the universe.
Energy distributed
evenly in the body
is what the diseases
from settling.
You don't have to
be afraid of germs.
If your body is electrified,
they will be electrocuted.
>> Everything you do
affects your brain.
By tensing the muscles, you're
activating your frontal lobes.
If you lower the stress
hormones in the brain,
it lowers your blood
pressure and your heart rate,
and it gets your mind
prepared for doing whatever
it is that you're about to do.
>> Kriya Yoga teaches in the
spine are these instruments
of higher perception that
are normally dormant in most
people.
Through withdrawing that
energy and directing it
by concentration into
the spine and brain,
Yogananda said those instruments
of divine perceptions awaken.
The physical world is
not the highest reality.
>> When we have
a dream at night,
it feels incredibly real
while we're in the dream.
And then we wake up, and
we look at the reality
that we're now in, and we say,
oh OK, that was just a dream.
Well, when people have
mystical experiences they say,
well, this is the
ultimate reality.
This feels more real.
And all this other stuff, that's
not really the real reality.
>> Feel the life currents
ascending and descending
in the spine.
By mastery of the
intelligent life currents
in the central nervous
system, the body and brain
can be purified.
Go up and down the spine,
feeling the centers,
and mentally chanting "ohm."
[TYPEWRITER KEYS CLACKING]
>> Dear Guruji, I
have absorbed so much.
I will try to keep it all
within me and profit by it.
Self-Realization has
helped my career.
It has helped me to
think very little of me
and let the Great
Spirit pass through me.
[MUSIC - AMELITA GALLI CURCI,
"AIDA, O TERRA, ADDIO"]
>> Dear Swami Dhirananda,
our existence here depends
on the success of Los Angeles.
You are needed.
>> Mount Washington needed
someone to be at the helm while
Guruji travelled throughout
the United States, lecturing,
giving classes.
He brought one of his
most beloved friends
who was a very capable teacher.
He was very well liked.
>> I'm powerless to tell
how greatly he has helped me
in carrying on my educational
work in India and Boston.
He successfully carried on
the work at the Ranchi school
during my absence from India.
>> This was his childhood
friend from Calcutta.
And I think as boys
both of them felt
that their families
didn't understand
their spiritual longings.
In fact, Dhirananda said that
it was impossible for him
to even meditate
at his family home.
So Yogananda allowed him to
hide out in his attic room,
and he would sneak food
up to him after the meals.
[MUSIC - "SUNDAY"]
>> The 1920s was a period
of almost ceaseless travel
for him.
He was visiting all
of the largest cities
in the United
States, where people
were getting their first
glimpse of this yoga philosophy.
[CAR HORNS]
>> There is no
precursor for Yogananda.
He has to do something
completely new
that no one has done before.
There is no path.
>> There were other
gurus who came.
Swami Vivekananda, whom
Yogananda respected greatly,
had been here and started the
Vedanta Society in the 1890s.
But he only stayed a few years.
Yogananda was the
first major guru
to have a nationwide impact and
really make America his home.
>> In America everybody is busy.
And if you keep on running
after too many hobbies,
you won't have any
time left for bliss.
>> Everything was
covered in the lessons,
from how to achieve
success in our life,
magnetizing or attracting your
soul mate, creating abundance,
how to create harmony with
others, how to find happiness.
>> You people do
not sleep correctly.
You subconsciously
worry about unpaid bills
and allow your sleep
to be disturbed
by the mental movies of dreams.
By closing the eyes
and enough relaxation,
I can remain asleep
several nights.
And by opening the eyes
and recharging the body,
I can keep awake several days.
>> Willpower is really one
of the absolute necessities
for spiritual progress.
Yogananda defined
willpower in this way.
He said, will is that which
changes thought into energy.
>> He asked the six men to line
up with their hands on each
other's back, making a
line across the platform.
Swamiji said to the first one,
put your hands on my stomach.
With just a tiny
straightening of his body
and a quick flick
of his stomach,
Swamiji sent the six men
catapulting across the stage.
[LAUGHTER]
>> What's the key of success?
Concentration power.
You meditate too achieve
the concentration powers.
>> He would control his
heart and stop the pulse,
and the doctors would rush,
check his pulse-- he's dying,
he doesn't have a pulse.
And then he would bring
himself back to life.
>> Every human being in the
world has a supernatural power.
But having doesn't mean
anything if you don't know
how to use it.
>> Yoga combines the physical,
mental, and spiritual forces.
Bikram must be in
complete control,
or he's in danger
of being impaled.
Here he goes!
He did it!
And Yogi Bikram is all right.
>> But before you use it,
you have to realize it.
That's why Yogananda
called Self-Realization.
You have to realize that power--
supernatural, cosmic, physical,
mental, spiritual power.
>> Don't take my
word for anything.
Apply these techniques and
find out for yourselves.
>> Here is a small, brown mystic
from a nation that very few
Americans had ever been
to, much less read about.
And he is here delivering
his message with such force
through personal transmission
to people who came to see him.
>> Most important is to create
a church within yourself where
you are the minister in the
temple of your own soul.
>> When somebody is
in a deep meditation,
there are changes in the brain.
We've seen changes
in the brain scans
of the different parts of the
brain that become more active.
What you're seeing during
a meditation practice
is a very substantial
decrease of activity
in the part of the brain
which normally helps
to create a sense of our self
and a sense of our orientation
in space and time.
As you progressively block
the activity in that area,
then you block your ability to
establish your sense of self
as distinguished from
the rest of the world.
And you begin to feel that
sense of deep connectedness,
or oneness, with
everything in the world.
>> I'm a physicist
and a physician.
I spent years between the
Harvard physics department
and the Harvard Medical
School, going back and forth
across the Charles River, but
they don't talk to each other.
As a child, having
been exposed to things
like Vedic philosophy, growing
up in rural Mississippi,
I became inspired
by this deep belief
that there is an
underlying unity in nature.
I wish these different
fields could come together.
And so that led me to want
to combine these two worlds
of physics and biomedicine.
Physics-- our physics
of the last century--
has not come to terms with
life, living systems, and things
like consciousness.
The writings of
Yogananda are very
appealing to a
scientific appetite.
He was committed to
bringing together
the technology and the
material efficiency
of the scientific
understanding of the West
with the ancient spiritual
wisdom of the East
and creating a unified framework
and an integrated approach
to living life on this planet.
>> In Washington, something
remarkable happened.
Yogananda drew the largest
audience as a public speaker
had drawn in the city--
congressmen, senators,
judges-- and he
was even invited to the White
House by President Coolidge.
But Yogananda came in
for a rude awakening
when he was in Washington,
which is really
part of the American South.
>> In the national capital, I
was told that white people only
would be permitted to
attend the classes.
This surprised me very much.
I defied this and founded
an Afro-American yoga center
to teach my Negro brethren.
Cosmic delusion is
always snaring us
through our ignorance.
>> The Civil Rights Movement
was still decades away,
and it was inspired, in fact, by
a revolution that was fomenting
in India.
>> Many people don't realize
that Gandhi was a yogi,
and he was putting yoga
principles such as nonviolence
into action on a mass scale.
>> Yogananda himself was a
very open and vocal supporter
of Gandhi and lectured at
Harvard about him and his
movement.
>> And for this, he was put on
a government watch list and kept
under surveillance.
>> Anyone affiliated with
India and someone specifically
affiliated with Mahatma Gandhi
would be a person of interest
for the American government.
>> Why are these people drawn
to this heathen teacher?
What is he doing
behind closed doors?
Are they trying to overthrow
our government too?
>> There was literally a
war against yoga being waged
in the media.
>> A huge scandal erupted
when Swami Dhirananda,
Yogananda's right-hand man,
was discovered giving private
lessons to a married woman, and
her husband found out about it,
stormed Mount Washington,
and a brawl erupted.
There were crazy
tracts being written--
rumors, all kinds
of allegations,
not just about Yogananda,
but some of the other swamis
and yoga teachers, that
this was a love cult
and they were corrupting
the women of America.
>> Yogananda, as a yogi, would
often talk about mastery over
one's sexuality, over one's
own urges, self-discipline.
But oftentimes that
was misinterpreted
to mean something scandalous.
>> You had a kind of paranoia
on the part of the husbands
and law enforcement
officials that, you know,
we couldn't trust our women with
these dark-skinned foreigners.
>> You can read between the
lines here what the problem
really is.
I mean, this was a period
where miscegenation laws--
you know, you were
forbidden in America
if you were white to marry a
brown-skinned man or woman.
So I mean, it was illegal to
mix the races at that point.
>> This marriage is symbolical
of breaking down the barriers
of the brown Caucasian of
India and the white Caucasian
of America.
>> Ohm.
Amen.
Ohm.
>> On the one hand, open-minded
Americans revered him,
but his unorthodox views
really raised the ire of more
conservative Americans.
By the time he went
into the Deep South,
it really reached
a fevered pitch.
>> Swami was ordered to leave
Miami for his own safety.
The husbands of more
than 200 Miami women
were preparing to
quote, "get the Hindu."
[CHATTER]
>> His supporters
swarmed City Hall.
And during the hearing,
Police Chief Quigg
claims that Yogananda
tried to hypnotize him.
>> Yogananda is no longer being
invited to receive the keys
to different cities.
He's no longer being
invited to speak
to different religious
congregations.
>> I am going through the
severest trial of my life.
Judge for yourself the lying
capacity of the newspapers.
>> Back in Los Angeles, the
District Attorney eventually
cleared Yogananda and Mount
Washington of all wrongdoing,
but the damage had
already been done.
>> The fruits of a lifetime
of service to mankind reduced
to ashes by the soulless
efforts of yellow journalism.
>> All these incidents
culminated in a falling out
between Yogananda
and Dhirananda.
>> Dhirananda left and he
started another organization
not far from Mount Washington.
>> And many of the students
went with Dhirananda
because Yogananda had been
busy touring the country
for the last year.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The final heartbreak came
a couple of years later,
when Dhirananda left the swami
order altogether and married
one of his Los Angeles students.
Then he sued Yogananda
for his share of the work
they had done together.
>> With a heavy heart,
I'm starting for Mexico,
cutting loose from everything
that I may consecrate myself
to God entirely.
Divine Mother, free me.
Let me go back to India to
serve you there-- not here,
where there is bitterness
and heartache and frustration
and no one to listen
to your message.
>> In Yogananda's darkest hours,
there's only one place that he
went.
He always went within.
We call it God,
place of stillness.
>> Many times I have tried
to walk away from these
organizational responsibilities,
but every time Divine Mother
comes and takes me by the
ear and says, come back.
>> And he said, when I
received that answer, I wept.
And I knew I had to go back.
I knew this is what
God wanted from me.
>> Walking only under
the guise of denunciation
or non-attachment
is the easy part.
It shows more spiritual
fiber to live a godly life
in the jungle of civilization.
I love all, even those who
avow themselves my enemies.
For I see thee in every being.
I will rebuild this
organization from scratch,
just as I did when I
arrived from India in 1920.
>> With that renewed faith and
the determination that he would
not give up, even though he
was sorely tried and wanted
to leave, he began
to draw disciples.
One of them was me.
I came in 1931, and many
other young people came.
There were older people here.
That was all ages living here.
>> Yogananda had consistently
drawn his devotees from all
walks of life--
prominent businessmen
judges, lawyers,
even hardened journalists.
>> But by the early 1930s,
something very different was
beginning.
A small core group of
devotees came to Yogananda
and asked to be accepted
into this monastic path
of complete renunciation,
to completely devote
their whole lives to
following his teachings,
and seeking God through this
path of Kriya Yoga meditation.
James Lynn, the wealthy
businessman, was one of them.
And he'd go on to become
a highly advanced yogi
and take monastic
vows like the others.
And so, through Yogananda, this
ancient monastic swami order
from India took root in America.
>> Now began the training.
I knew nothing
about renunciation.
>> The new monastics took strict
vows, like Yogananda himself,
of simplicity, celibacy,
obedience, and loyalty.
Yogananda's lay students
faced other challenges.
>> I'd been there about
six or seven weeks.
And I said, Guruji, all my
life I heard thou canst not,
thou shalt not, thou must not.
These are the rules of the
religious teachings that I've
heard around my relatives.
What I want to know from
you is, what canst thou?
He said, (MIMICKING
YOGANDA) well, do you smoke?
I said, yes.
He said, you may continue.
Do you drink alcohol?
I said, yes.
He said you may continue.
Do you enjoy the opposite
sex promiscuously?
Yes.
Well, you may continue.
I said, wait a minute.
You mean that I can
come up on this hill
here, in this good
place with all
of these wonderful people,
your disciples and the devotees
and the brothers up here,
and study these teachings,
and I go back down there
and do all these things.
(MIMICKING YOGANANDA)
Absolutely.
But I will not promise
you that as you continue
to study these teachings that
the desire to do these things
will not fall away from you.
>> Repeated performance of
inaction creates a mental
blueprint, causing the formation
of subtle electrical pathways
in the brain, somewhat like the
grooves in a phonograph record.
Your life follows the
grooves that you yourself
have created in the brain.
>> It appears that Yogananda was
talking about neuroplasticity
almost 50 years before Western
doctors took an interest in it.
He said that regular
Kriya practice
could rewire your brain and
help eliminate unwanted habits.
>> So "The
Autobiography of a Yogi"
is the book that I keep stacks
of them around the house,
and I give it out constantly,
you know, to people.
You know like when people need
re-grooving, I say, read this.
>> We are not talking
about suppression.
We are talking
about transmutation.
Re-channeling-- that's the
whole science of yoga--
re-channeling your
energy, creating
new patterns of thinking, new
patterns of the emotional life.
>> When he looked at you
penetratingly, he was changing.
He said when he
looked at you, he
was changing your brain cells.
And he did.
>> He started going in to my
inner thoughts and feelings,
maybe things where
you've slipped a little.
He dissected me on the
deepest level I'd ever been.
I felt like I was
being carved down
until a little tiny person,
down to almost like an ant.
And I remember I just literally
couldn't take any more.
I humanly, emotionally
couldn't take it.
You know, I was hurting.
I mean, I was crying.
He reached over, and
he gave me a big hug.
I've given you my
unconditional love, he says.
Do not fail to take
advantage of it.
It's a friendship and a love
that he took you as you were,
and he gave it all to you,
as much as you could take.
[THUNDER]
>> There is just a thin screen
of ether between the world
and my guru.
He's haunting me day and night.
(LOUDLY) Return to India.
You must come make
the supreme effort.
Traversing 10,000 miles in
the twinkling of an eye,
his message penetrated my being
like a flash of lightning.
I have spent 15 years in
spreading my guru's teachings
in America.
Now he recalls me.
Our arrival found such an
immense crowd assembled
to greet us, I was
unprepared for the magnitude
of our welcome.
We broke our journey
halfway across the continent
to see Mahatma Gandhi.
After great discussions, he took
lessons, Kriya, and recharging
exercises.
I was touched by his
spirit of inquiry.
When we prayed together,
the whole place
seemed filled with God.
>> Master could hardly wait
till he got to meet his master.
[CHATTER]
It was indescribable, the
meeting between the two.
Master dropped to
his knees, touched
his feet of Sri Yukteswar Giri.
Sri Yukteswar Giri was welcoming
back his triumphant son.
>> A healing calm descended
at the mere sight of my guru.
Quietly sitting beside him,
I would feel his bounty
pouring peacefully
over my being.
Such spiritual atmosphere,
I so long missed.
Day and night passes with
God mad, God hungry clouds.
It's wonderful to work amongst
people who don't need coaxing
to be spiritual.
The Himalayan kids
are calling me,
and the people's heart
kids are welcoming me.
But for a few beloved
disciples at Mount Washington,
I have no attraction
to go back to America.
I would roam by the Yumana,
where Krishna played
his flute of eternity
and never visit
the shores of material life.
[LOCOMOTIVE, CLANGING]
The lion of Bengal is gone.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The body which had
reflected omnipresent wisdom
lay lifeless before me mocking.
Master mine, why
did you leave me?
The Lord is showing me
wherever I am, that's my home.
My home is on the train.
Then it shall be in the
hotel and then on the ship.
How can I leave my home?
It's everywhere.
[GUNFIRE]
>> When Sri Yukteswar first
sent Yogananda on his mission
to America, it was
right after World War I,
which was supposed to be
the war to end all wars.
Now, tensions were heating
up in Europe and Asia,
and Yogananda saw that we could
be entering a period of even
greater horror.
The need for the teachings
was more urgent than ever.
[MUSIC - PHILIP GLASS, "WHY DOES
SOMEONE HAVE TO DIE"]
>> After his guru died,
something shifted in him.
He was just experiencing
these profound states
of consciousness.
>> His eyes just turned glassy.
He just [WHISTLES] withdrew,
and he was gone, you know?
>> And oft times, it gave
concern to us younger ones.
His heart seemed
to cease beating.
He had instructed
us that whenever
he went into samadhi that
we could bring him out
of it by chanting
"ohm" in his right ear.
>> And I thought, wow, this
is something different.
This was a little scary.
>> Is my guru always now
going to be in this state?
I would be in awe to ever
approach him in the same way.
>> And my body became
just like stone,
and still I was fully conscious,
and everything was light.
>> And it was out of that
consciousness that he was
pulling these writings,
these profound truths
and experiences.
>> He constantly stressed
to me, get my thoughts,
understand what I mean--
I can do much more now to
reach others with my pen.
>> "The Autobiography of a
Yogi" was the first memoir
of a genuine Indian holy man.
>> It was his personal feeling
about his devotion to his gurus
and what he's really
received from them.
>> But it's not all
that Yogananda wrote.
Yogananda produced an
incredible literary corpus.
>> Every morning he would
have us bring a typewriter
and a table and bring
it into his study.
>> He will be up at 1:00 or
2:00 in the morning writing.
>> Night and day he
wrote, or he dictated,
and we would type all day long.
>> And he would be
totally, totally absorbed.
Hours would go by.
His whole consciousness
became absorbed
in finishing his writings.
And it was that
sense of urgency--
it was like an acceleration--
an acceleration of our
discipline, of our training.
>> And not only was he writing,
he was building temples,
founding brotherhood colonies,
and encouraging people to live
together in spiritual
communities.
And then in 1945, while he was
writing "The Autobiography,"
we set off the
first atomic bomb.
[EXPLOSION]
>> A few people cried.
Most people were silent.
I remembered the line
from the Hindu scripture,
the Bhagavad Gita,
"Now I am become death,
the destroyer of worlds."
>> About 100 years ago, Einstein
gave us a framework that
radically changed
modern physics.
It put energy and matter on
some sort of equivalent footing.
We're going to have to expand
the language of physics
to come to terms, not only
with matter and energy,
but matter, energy, and
maybe even consciousness.
>> The human mind can and must
liberate within itself energies
greater than those
within stones and metals,
lest the atomic giant,
newly unleashed,
done on the world in
mindless destruction.
>> Modern times as it is now
is based on what is called
the subject-object split.
I am the subject, and
there is the universe.
Whereas spirituality
says that there
is a consciousness that includes
the subject and the object.
Consciousness gives
rise to everything,
including the brain.
>> We have been brought up to
think that the mind is this
thing that sits up here
somewhere in the brain.
But really the
mind is everywhere.
>> Some people have argued that
consciousness resides in every
cell of our body.
The only way for us
to really understand
the nature of consciousness
and what it is,
is to explore it both
from sort of the outside
in and from the inside out.
>> Delusion is the belief that
there is something outside
of you.
But your happiness is not based
on anything outside of you--
in the inside,
wherein the watcher
is watching all of the
craziness, kind of just
laughing.
So look inside for
the watcher and be
connected to the watcher,
and then be awake.
>> The Indian teachings that
Yogananda represented were not
escapes.
They were methods of
adapting to these upheavals
and these changes,
because they remind people
that we are more than the
personality and the roles
that we play and
the body we inhabit.
>> When I am the soul, I know
that nothing is important
on the earth-- nothing,
nothing at all.
Only love is important.
>> If we're going to change
those kind of circumstances
so there's hope
for our survival,
the change has to
come from inside out.
>> A man who has reformed
himself will reform thousands.
>> Yogananda saw that if
there wasn't some way to reach
the masses with this
message of yoga--
this message of experiencing
the spirit within every human
being--
the world would not survive the
transition into the Atomic Age.
>> They were leading this
foundation at that time
to bring the teachings current,
so they can really create
a transformation on a
collective level in the world,
not just in the forest.
The forest is here now.
This is bigger and
is ever increasing.
If you don't practice
the teachings here,
there will be no
forest left at all.
>> "The Autobiography"
was a doorway in.
It was a table-setter
for millions of people.
Whether they ended up
being practitioners
of Kriya Yoga or not, Yogananda
was a doorway into whatever
pathway they found.
[CHATTER, MUSIC PLAYING]
>> On the way out of the
memorial service for Steve,
they handed us a copy
of Yogananda's book.
Steve's last message to
us was actualize yourself.
That was Yogananda's message.
>> He was constantly encouraging
you to simultaneously be able
to think of yourself as this
little blip on the planet.
But on the other hand, you also
had infinite potentialities.
You had the eternal soul in you.
So can you
simultaneously operate
with that awareness
of recognizing,
in a humble way, the limited
bounds of your human life
and at the same time the
infinite potentialities of you
as a soul?
>> We have a far too limited
sense of our capacity as human
beings to overcome disease,
to overcome poverty,
and therefore, to allow that
power to begin to transform
the world.
>> When the ambassador of
India visited Los Angeles
for the first time, how
happy Yogananda was that this
representative of free India,
liberated from the colonial
rule, had come to Los Angeles,
and he was able to honor him.
A banquet was organized
to welcome the ambassador,
and Yogananda, being one of
the most well known Indians
in the community, was invited
to give one of the key speeches
that night.
>> The night before, when
walking down the hall,
he turned to me and said, do
you know it is just a matter
of hours, and I will be gone?
>> When Master got up
to speak, I was there.
He had always
said, when I die, I
want to die speaking of
my America and my India.
>> Free me then, oh Lord, from
the bondage of the body that I
may show others how they
can free themselves.
>> --lotus, scenic beauty, and
sages, thy wide doors are open,
welcoming God's true sons
through all the ages,
where Ganges woods, Himalayan
caves, and men dream God.
I am hallowed.
My body touched that sod.
>> He finished saying,
"I am hallowed.
My body touched that sod," and
then collapsed to the floor.
>> As I knelt over his body, a
tremendous force entered this
body with the
message to my soul,
this time you cannot
call him back.
>> In the yoga tradition, there
is a sacred practice of knowing
when you will leave your body,
and soul consciousness moves
to a grander space.
The doctor said that
he had a heart attack.
>> Watch the show
of the universe,
but do not become
absorbed in it.
I behold life and death like
the rise and fall of waves
on the sea.
I am the ocean of consciousness.
>> The guru can't be a little
old man in a blanket or a guy
in robes.
It could look like
that, because guru-ness
might be living in
that body for a while,
and it interacts with
you because you have
a karmic tie with that being.
But that being, if
he's really a guru,
he's not at all identified
with being in that body.
[BELL]
Once I ask the saint in India,
after Maharani died, and I
said, how can I get
closer to my guru?
He looked at me
like I was crazy.
He said, your guru is what's
looking out of your eyes
right now.
So get with that for a while.
[MUSIC - ALANIS MORISSETTE,
"STILL"]
(SINGING) I am the
harm that you inflict.
I am your brilliance
and frustration.
I'm the nuclear bombs
if they're to hit.
I am your immaturity
and your indignance.
I am your misfits
and your praised.
I am your doubt and
your conviction.
I am your charity and your rape.
I am your grasping
and expectation.
I see you averting your glances.
I see you cheering on the war.
I see you ignoring
your children.
And I love you still.
Haaaaaaaaaaaaaaaah.
[VOCALIZING]
>> Everything is Brahma.
Everything is spirit.
Everything is light.
[MUSIC - GEORGE HARRISON, "GIVE
ME LOVE"]
(SINGING) Give me love.
Give me love.
Give me peace on earth.
Give me light.
Give me life.
Keep me free from birth.
Give me hope.
Help me cope with this heavy
load, trying to touch and reach
you with heart and soul.
Oh my Lord, please
take hold of my hand,
that I might understand you.
Won't you please, oh, won't you?
Give me love.
Give me peace on earth.
Give me light.
Give me life.
Keep me free from birth.
Give me hope.
Help me cope with this heavy
load, trying to touch and reach
you with heart and soul.
Oh my Lord.
Won't you please, oh, won't you?
Give me love.
Give me peace on earth.
Give me light.
Give me life.
Keep me free from birth.
Give me hope.
Help me cope with this heavy
load, trying to touch and reach
you with heart and soul.
Oh, give me love.
Give me love.
Give me peace on earth.
Give me light.
Give me life.
Keep me-- keep me from birth.
Now, give me hope.
But help me cope with this heavy
load, trying to touch and reach
you with heart and soul.
Oh my Lord.
[MUSIC PLAYING]